#DIY Academic Publishing
In the old days any self-respecting group of radical intellectuals or activists worth their salt set up a printing press. Control of the means of production generated heady times, and usually also growing debt and often bankruptcy. Today, new technologies make it ridiculously easy to set up a digital press with minimal costs.

Rounded Globe is a new scholarly e-publishing operation. In this post we explain how we work.

 
# Technologies
Not all new technologies are the same. A distinction needs to be drawn between proprietary and ‘free’ software, where the latter is released under a copyleft license and is open to others to improve the code. Most academics use proprietary software, and this retards their ability to harness the full potential of digital technology.

Proprietary software provides everything the user might require within a single package. For example, Word replicates different elements of publishing within a single program – a user inputs text but also adds italics, chooses font, adds headers, and so on. The result is a pretty document behind which is a lot of unwieldy code that (in part intentionally) prevents that file working well with other software. So on receipt of the inevitable Word document, the first step of any professional publisher is to strip the text out of Word and rebuild it with in-house technology.

Open or free software is designed in a completely different way. Coders aim to write programs that do one thing only, do it well, and work together with other programs. The result lacks the easy visual interface of Word or WordPress, but is vastly more efficient and useful.

So to turn to Rounded Globe. Our site hosts both eBooks and a blog. Both are ultimately basic .txt files written in markdown and hosted on git repositories. Markdown is a way of indicating style features within the text – here, for example, the italics are generated by asterisks: *within*. Git is free software, used primarily by coders, and allows multiple users to modify a file as required. [Style – drew?]

The result is a simple system whereby the .txt files generate our blog posts and our eBooks, the latter in epub, mobi (Kindle) and html (webpage) form.

Note that we follow the commercial eBook model rather than the academic convention of rendering eBooks and articles as pdf files. Pdfs are useful for embedding lots of visual information within a short text. But their adoption as the default format for books and articles is an attempt to reproduce the printed page on an electronic screen, reminiscent of the way the first printed books were designed to look like handwritten manuscripts. By turning our back on the pdf we remove at a stroke all the costs associated with typesetting a manuscript.

To sum up: the costs of our basic operation do not greatly exceed that of running a standard website. Of course, there is some serious copy-editing of the original manuscript (we pride ourselves on providing a service superior to most academic presses). Beyond this and webhosting costs, some hours are spent converting Word documents to markdown (labour that would be unnecessary if only our authors wrote in markdown!), we have to pay for covers, and we have to put time into social media.

 
# Publishing Model
Once you have set up your git repositories and your host website you have to decide on how to distribute your eBooks. Rounded Globe insists that all its authors publish their work under a creative commons license that allows the work to be freely shared, which by implication means that readers download eBooks for free.

On the surface, our decision to produce free eBooks aligns us with the open access movement. We are certainly sympathetic to the idea that the research of salaried university academics should be open to all. But Rounded Globe publishes the work of independent scholars as well as university employees, and independent scholars need to find ways to monetize their research efforts. At the heart of Rounded Globe is an experiment with a new model of scholarly production, reception, and income.

At the core of our publishing model is a separation of production, distribution, and revenue.

Production: If we accept a submission, and if the author agrees to publish under a creative commons license, then, without charge, we transform manuscript into eBook.

Distribution: We share these eBooks on our website. Rounded Globe holds no special rights over these works, however. The creative commons license means that copyright remains with the authors, who are free to distribute through other channels (at least two of our eBooks are also sold on Amazon), while any other site can legally host them.

In this model there is no place for market exchange, i.e. sales. Hence, we are not concerned with profits, royalties, contracts, or VAT. As with the free software that runs Rounded Globe, this facilitates an uncomplicated operation and an efficient use of our time and energy.

Revenue: We fund our work through donations, the most part of which are generated via a Patreon campaign. Patreon is a version of the crowd-funding idea tailored to artists and musicians. Dedicated fans become ‘patrons’ by committing to donate a fixed amount each time a new song/video/etc. is released. Each month Patreon distributes over $6 million in donations. Ultimately, we would like to see Patreon, or some equivalent, supporting individual scholars. At present we use it to fund Rounded Globe.

At the time of writing we have only a handful of patrons, but their collective generosity brings us $320 each time we release a new eBook. This money is vital: it covers web hosting, cover design (outsourced) and allows us to pay a friend to do some basic social media. This still    leaves copy-editing, coding, website design, and database construction costs. We have faith that our Patreon campaign will eventually allow Rounded Globe to (more or less) pay for itself.

The same basic model holds also for authors. In agreeing to the creative commons license, authors commit themselves to offering their work for free; but we place donate buttons on the download page for each eBook, and suggest a donation of $5.00.

Rounded Globe also incorporates a marketing strategy derived from the many thousands of new fiction writers spawned by the self-publishing revolution initiated by Amazon. Self-published authors enjoy a potentially massive market, but face an acute problem of visibility. Their most common marketing strategy is the ‘giveaway’: distributing one eBook for free in order to generate an audience for other titles. For independent scholars who want to earn some income from their writing, Rounded Globe can be regarded as a glorified giveaway, fueling interest in other titles sold elsewhere.


# Changing Academic Culture
The extent to which Rounded Globe can help generate an income for authors is dependent on a number of factors, most beyond our control.

Where we can act is on the simple question of numbers. For every 100 readers, say one donates to the author. So the more readers, the more donations (and also the more interest in other titles sold elsewhere). For this reason Rounded Globe has a duty to our authors to use social media to promote the visibility of their eBooks. (And we are still working out how best to do this).

But the visibility of a title, as well as readers’ willingness to donate, is very much in the hands of the author. Today we are witnessing the emergence of a new breed of social media scholar. Eleanor Parker, one of our authors, is a good example. Eleanor blogs on medieval history and literature - a seemingly obscure subject, yet she has over 8,000 Twitter followers. This means that she is in a good position (far better than Rounded Globe) to promote her forthcoming title on the Danish Conquest of England of 1016. But more importantly, Eleanor’s blog posts have brought a lot of people a lot of pleasure over a number of years. For such an audience the Rounded Globe donate button provides a way of expressing appreciation for more than just a single eBook.

More generally, the very idea of earning an income through donations rather than a salary or royalties is dependent upon creating a new kind of cultural space within which academics engage with others. The university system supports specialists who write for other specialists; providing the wider public with little reason to engage with, let alone support academic writers. But people outside the universities are hungry for well-founded accessible scholarship, and are not without understanding of the years of research that it takes to produce. To the extent that academics begin to write for a general audience so, we believe, new opportunities for funding research will open up.

Rounded Globe provides one model of a new kind of scholarly e-publishing. Its low costs and simplicity of operation is the key to its survival. But it will bear fruit only by joining with others to create an alternative, accessible academic culture.
